---
layout: post
title: >
    [Stat]Bootstrap: Why It Works(II)
---

In last post, I summarize the bootstrap from the perspective of Delta method. This time, I will discuss the Bootstrap from the perspective of asymptotic expansion.

Among the asymptotic expansion techniques, there is an expansion called Edgeworth expansion. It is the expansion for the cumulative density function. Hall (1992) showed that, if Cramer's condition hold, the CDF of a studentized statistic $$T$$ has the following expansion:
$$
P(T\le x) = \Phi(x)+n^{-1/2}p_1(x)\phi(x) + n^{-1}p_2(x)\phi(x)+...+n^{-j/2}p_j(x)\phi(x)+...
$$

in which $$\Phi(.)$$ and $$\phi(.)$$ are standard normal CDF and PDF, $$p_j(.)$$'s are some polynomial functions depending on some population moments of the data.

The bootstrap amounts to estimate this expansion with
$$
P(T_{boot} \le x) = \Phi(x)+n^{-1/2}\hat p_1(x)\phi(x) + n^{-1}\hat p_2(x)\phi(x)+...+n^{-j/2}\hat p_j(x)\phi(x)+...
$$
Those polynomials in this expression are plug-in estimators.

The benefit of this cumbersome formulation is that we can evaluate its asymptotic behavior. Central limit theorem (CLT) is a popular tool for asymptotic approximation. The CLT approximates the distribution of $$T$$ by $$\Phi(x)$$, the first term of the Edgeworth expansion , and it discards the rest of the terms. Let's call it $$O(n^{-1/2})$$ accuracy because the error term is of this order. 

It seems that the bootstrap can achieve infinite-order accuracy since it has infinite terms contained in the approximation, isn't it? Unfortunately, the answer is negative. Very often, the moment estimator can achieve an error with $$O_p(n^{-1/2})$$ order, so is $$\hat p_1(x)$$. Consequently, $$\hat p_1(x)- p_1(x)=O_p(n^{-1/2})$$. So the accuracy of the estimated Edgeworth expanison is $$O_p(n^{-1})$$. To see this, we simply take the difference:

$$
P(T_{boot} \le x) - P(T \le x) = n^{-1/2}[\hat p_1(x)- p_1(x)] + n^{-1}[\hat p_2(x)- p_2(x)]+...= O_p(n^{-1})
$$



Put it in short, Bootstrap provides an estimate for the asymptotic expansion.

  







---
### References

Peter Hall. *The bootstrap and Edgeworth expansion*. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.