---
layout: post
title: >
 [Paper]When it pays to follow the crowd Strategy conformity and CTA performance
---

CTAs barely produce excess returns. Future markets feature strong serial correlation and result in robust momentum. In hedge funds, profitability is associated with the ability of finding unique opportunities. For example, Titman and Tiu (2010) use factor model to capture the returns of funds, low $$R^2$$ tend to outperform. Sun et al(2012) show hedge funds with lower correlation with peers tend to outperform. They defined Strategy Distinctiveness Index (SDI).

But in CTA, conformity is better in terms of performance. This paper measures the relation between SDI and CTA performance. CTAs with differenticated strategies underperform those that conform. The reason is failure to pursue profitable momentum opportunities.

$$
SDI_{i, t} = 1-corr_t(r_i, r_c)
$$

is the SDI for fund i at time t. $$r_i$$ is the return of fund i, $$r_c$$ is the cluster return of group c in which i is a member. The cluster is determined by statistical clustering based on returns.


Regress the returns of fund i on the seven factor Fung and Hsieh (2004) risk model, the $$R^2$$ measures the degree to which hedge fund managers hedge systematic risk.

Performance measures. Abnormal return (alpha): the return in excess of any expected return generated by exposure to risk factors. Appraisal ratio: estimated abnormal return scaled by its standard error. Sharpe ratios. Manipulation proof performance measure (MPPM).




---

Paper link: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3481243
